<!-- OntologySync Start -->
{{SOP
|has_description=Operating procedures for the DIY Controleo3-based toaster oven reflow oven
|has_document_type=SOP
|has_sop_type=Equipment Operation
|has_purpose=Covers setup, profile selection, operation, and maintenance of the lab's DIY reflow oven built from a modified toaster oven with a Controleo3 controller from Whizoo Electronics. For general reflow safety, PPE, and waste disposal, refer to the Solder Reflow Oven Safety SOP.
|has_safety_precautions=Review the Solder Reflow Oven Safety SOP before first use. This is a modified consumer toaster oven — the enclosure gets extremely hot during operation. Do not touch any exterior surface during or after a cycle without heat-resistant gloves. The door servo opens automatically during cooling — keep hands and objects clear of the door path. The oven is not UL-listed; do not leave it unattended during operation. Ensure the oven is plugged into a GFCI-protected outlet.
|has_technique=Reflow soldering, SMD assembly
}}
<!-- OntologySync End -->
[[Category:SOP]]
[[Category:OntologySync-managed-resource]]

== Equipment Overview ==
The lab reflow oven is a modified toaster oven controlled by a Controleo3 board from Whizoo Electronics. Key components:
* '''Controller:''' Controleo3 with color touchscreen — manages heating elements, fan, and door servo via 6 relay outputs
* '''Heating elements:''' Top, bottom, and boost elements (wired to separate relays for independent control)
* '''Thermocouple:''' K-type thermocouple positioned in the oven chamber for closed-loop temperature feedback
* '''Door servo:''' Automatically opens the oven door during the cooling phase for rapid cooldown
* '''Convection fan:''' Circulates air for even heating across the PCB

== Initial Setup (First Use or After Modification) ==

=== Learning Mode ===
The Controleo3 must run its learning mode before the first reflow. This is a one-time calibration:
# Ensure the oven is empty (no PCBs inside).
# From the touchscreen main menu, select '''Learning Mode'''.
# The controller will spend approximately 30 minutes testing each heating element and the fan, measuring how the oven responds to different power levels.
# After learning mode completes, the controller provides feedback on oven performance. Follow any recommendations (e.g., adding insulation, adjusting element wiring).
# Learning mode only needs to be re-run if the oven hardware is modified (new elements, insulation changes, etc.).

=== Thermocouple Placement ===
* The thermocouple tip should be positioned at board height in the center of the oven.
* Secure the thermocouple so it does not shift during door opening/closing.
* For best accuracy, the thermocouple can be clipped to a bare PCB at the same height as the production board.

== Profiles ==
The Controleo3 uses a simple profile language stored on its SD card. Common profiles:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Profile !! Paste Type !! Peak Temp !! Use Case
|-
| Lead-free (SAC305) || Lead-free || ~245C || Standard lead-free assembly
|-
| Leaded (Sn63/Pb37) || Leaded || ~215C || Leaded paste assembly
|-
| Low-temp (Sn42/Bi58) || Bismuth low-temp || ~165C || Temperature-sensitive components
|}

Profiles are editable text files on the SD card. Each profile specifies target temperatures, ramp rates, soak times, and commands for the door servo and fan.

== Procedure ==

=== Before Reflow ===
# Verify your PCB is stenciled and populated (see Solder Reflow Oven Safety SOP).
# Power on the oven at the wall switch.
# The Controleo3 touchscreen will display the main menu.

=== Selecting a Profile ===
# Tap '''Reflow''' on the touchscreen.
# Select the appropriate profile for your solder paste type.
# The screen will show the target temperature curve.

=== Loading the PCB ===
# Open the oven door (manually or via the touchscreen door control).
# Place the PCB in the center of the oven rack. Ensure it sits flat and is not touching the thermocouple.
# Close the door.

=== Running Reflow ===
# Tap '''Start''' on the touchscreen to begin the reflow cycle.
# The touchscreen displays a real-time temperature graph showing the actual temperature vs. the target profile.
# '''Do not open the door during the heating phases''' — the controller manages door position automatically.
# During the reflow cycle:
#* '''Preheat phase:''' Elements ramp the oven temperature gradually.
#* '''Soak phase:''' Temperature stabilizes to equalize heat across the board.
#* '''Reflow phase:''' Temperature rises to peak. Watch the display to confirm peak temperature is reached.
#* '''Cooling phase:''' The door servo automatically opens the door. The fan activates to accelerate cooling.
# The controller plays an audible tone when the cycle is complete.

=== Unloading ===
# Wait for the temperature display to show below 50C before handling the board without gloves.
# Remove the PCB. Inspect solder joints per the Solder Reflow Oven Safety SOP.
# Close the oven door after removal.

== Bake Mode ==
The Controleo3 supports a bake mode for:
* Pre-baking moisture-sensitive components (typically 125C for 24 hours per IPC/JEDEC J-STD-033)
* Curing conformal coatings or adhesives

To use:
# Select '''Bake''' from the main menu.
# Set the target temperature and duration (supports up to 168 hours).
# The controller maintains the set temperature with closed-loop control.

== Maintenance ==

=== After Each Use ===
* Allow the oven to cool completely.
* Wipe flux residue from the oven interior and rack with IPA and lint-free wipes.
* Clean the thermocouple tip with IPA if flux has splattered on it.

=== Monthly ===
* Inspect the heating element connections and relay wiring for signs of heat damage or loosening.
* Check the door servo operation — run the door open/close from the touchscreen menu to verify smooth movement.
* Inspect the thermocouple wire for damage, especially near the oven entry point where heat exposure is highest.
* Verify temperature accuracy: attach a second thermocouple to a test board and compare the reading against the Controleo3 display during a test run.

=== SD Card ===
* Keep a backup of your profiles on a computer.
* If the touchscreen becomes unresponsive or profiles are lost, re-flash the SD card with the backup profiles and Controleo3 firmware from the Whizoo website.

=== As Needed ===
* Re-run learning mode if heating elements are replaced, insulation is added, or temperature tracking has degraded.
* Replace the thermocouple if readings become erratic or drift significantly from a reference thermometer.
* Check and tighten the door servo arm if the door no longer opens to the correct position.

== Troubleshooting ==
* '''Profile not reaching peak temperature:''' The oven may be losing heat. Check door seal, add insulation to the oven exterior (kapton tape + ceramic fiber blanket). Re-run learning mode after insulation changes.
* '''Temperature overshoots peak:''' Re-run learning mode to re-tune the PID algorithm. Ensure the thermocouple is positioned correctly at board height, not near an element.
* '''Door servo not opening during cooling:''' Check the servo connection to the Controleo3 board. Verify the profile includes a door-open command. Test the servo from the touchscreen menu.
* '''Uneven soldering across the board:''' The convection fan may not be running — check the fan relay. Reposition the board to the center of the oven. Consider rotating the board 180 degrees and re-running if hot spots are persistent.
* '''Touchscreen unresponsive:''' Power cycle the oven. If the issue persists, check the ribbon cable connection between the Controleo3 and the display.
