<!-- OntologySync Start -->
[[Has description::Operating procedures for the Pixel Pump manual SMD pick-and-place tool by Robin's Tools]]
[[Has document type::SOP]]
[[Has SOP type::Equipment Operation]]
[[Has purpose::Covers setup, nozzle selection, operation, and maintenance of the Pixel Pump vacuum pick-and-place tool for manual SMD (surface-mount device) assembly. Suitable for prototype builds and small production runs.]]
[[Has safety precautions::The Pixel Pump operates at 12V DC and poses no significant electrical hazard. Use ESD precautions when handling sensitive components — wear an ESD wrist strap and work on a grounded ESD mat. Use tweezers or the vacuum nozzle to handle components; avoid touching small SMD parts with bare fingers as skin oils can affect solderability. If using the Pixel Pump alongside a reflow oven or hot plate, observe standard thermal safety precautions for those tools.]]
[[Has technique::SMD assembly]]
[[Has technique::Pick and place]]
<!-- OntologySync End -->
[[Category:SOP]]
[[Category:OntologySync-managed-resource]]

== Kit Contents ==
* Pixel Pump unit (RP2040-based controller with integrated vacuum pump)
* Foot pedal (primary vacuum control)
* 12V DC power supply with barrel jack
* USB Type-C cable (for firmware updates)
* Stainless steel nozzle set — five sizes with five of each:
** 0.3 mm OD — 0201, 0402 passives
** 0.5 mm OD — 0603, 0805 passives
** 0.8 mm OD — 1206 passives, small ICs (SOT-23, SOT-223)
** 1.3 mm OD — QFN, QFP, SOIC packages
** 1.8 mm OD — larger ICs, connectors, shielding cans
* Nozzles use a Luer lock slip fitting for quick changes and third-party nozzle compatibility

== Setup ==
# Place the Pixel Pump on a clean, ESD-safe workstation.
# Connect the 12V DC power supply to the barrel jack on the unit.
# Connect the foot pedal to the foot pedal port.
# (Optional) Connect a second foot pedal for Interactive BOM stepping if using the KiCad Interactive HTML BOM workflow.
# Power on the unit. The RGB backlit buttons will illuminate to confirm startup.

== Nozzle Selection ==
Select the smallest nozzle that reliably picks up your target component. Using a nozzle that is too large risks picking up adjacent components or swallowing very small parts.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Nozzle OD !! Best For !! Notes
|-
| 0.3 mm || 0201, 0402 || Smallest parts; position nozzle carefully
|-
| 0.5 mm || 0603, 0805 || Most common passive sizes
|-
| 0.8 mm || 1206, SOT-23, SOT-223 || Good general-purpose size
|-
| 1.3 mm || QFN, QFP, SOIC || Medium ICs
|-
| 1.8 mm || Large ICs, connectors || Caution: can swallow 0201/0402 parts
|}

To change nozzles, pull the current nozzle straight out of the Luer lock fitting and press the new one in until it seats.

== Operation ==

=== Picking Components ===
# Load your SMD component tape strips into the SMD magazines or magazine rail if available.
# Select the appropriate nozzle for the component size.
# Position the nozzle tip directly over the component in the tape pocket or tray.
# Press the foot pedal to activate the vacuum — the component will be picked up onto the nozzle tip.
# Hold the pedal down to maintain suction while moving the component to the PCB.

=== Placing Components ===
# With the component held on the nozzle, position it over the target pad(s) on the PCB. Use magnification (stereo microscope or magnifying lamp) for fine-pitch parts.
# Lower the nozzle until the component contacts the solder paste on the pads.
# Release the foot pedal to deactivate the vacuum and release the component.
# Placing accurately takes practice — developing a feel for the release timing is normal.

=== Adjusting Vacuum Power ===
* Use the silicone pushbuttons on the unit to switch between high and low vacuum power modes.
* '''Low power:''' for very small, lightweight parts (0201, 0402) where too much suction could damage the component or make precise placement difficult.
* '''High power:''' for larger, heavier components (ICs, connectors) that need stronger suction to hold securely.

=== LED Brightness ===
* The built-in RGB LEDs illuminate the work area around the nozzle tip.
* Adjust brightness using the pushbuttons. Reduce brightness if it causes glare under magnification.

=== Reverse (Blow) Mode ===
* Activate reverse mode via the pushbuttons to blow air outward through the nozzle.
* Use this to clear a clogged nozzle (solder paste or flux residue) without removing it from the unit.

== Interactive BOM Workflow (Optional) ==
If using the KiCad Interactive HTML BOM plugin:
# Open the Interactive BOM in a browser on a nearby screen.
# Connect the second foot pedal.
# Use the second pedal to step through the component list, highlighting the next component to place.
# Pick and place each component as the BOM advances — this keeps the workflow hands-free and sequential.

== Maintenance ==

=== After Each Session ===
* Remove the nozzle and inspect it for solder paste or flux residue. Clean with IPA and a lint-free wipe.
* Wipe down the unit exterior if solder paste or flux has contacted it.

=== Periodically ===
* Check and clean the internal user-serviceable filter to prevent particles from reaching the vacuum pump. Remove the filter, brush off debris, and replace.
* Inspect the foot pedal cable for damage or fraying.
* Check that nozzles are not bent or deformed — bent nozzles cause off-center picks.

=== Firmware Updates ===
* Connect the Pixel Pump via USB Type-C to a computer.
* Follow the instructions on the Robin's Tools website to flash updated firmware via the RP2040 bootloader (hold BOOT button while connecting USB).

== Troubleshooting ==
* '''Component not picking up:''' Verify the nozzle size is appropriate (not too large or too small for the part). Check that the nozzle is not clogged — use reverse mode to clear it. Ensure the foot pedal is fully depressed.
* '''Component drops during transit:''' Switch to high power mode. Check the nozzle for cracks or damage that could cause air leaks. Verify the filter is not clogged.
* '''Component lands off-center:''' Use a smaller nozzle for better centering. Ensure the nozzle is straight and not bent. Work under magnification for fine-pitch parts.
* '''Weak vacuum:''' Clean or replace the internal filter. Check the nozzle for a proper Luer lock seal.
