<!-- OntologySync Start -->
[[Has description::Safety and handling procedures for resin-based (SLA/MSLA/DLP) 3D printing]]
[[Has document type::SOP]]
[[Has SOP type::Safety]]
[[Has purpose::Establishes safe handling, post-processing, and disposal practices for photopolymer resin 3D printing. Applies to all SLA, MSLA, and DLP printers regardless of manufacturer.]]
[[Has safety precautions::Always wear nitrile gloves when handling uncured resin or resin-coated parts. Wear safety glasses to protect against splashes. Work in a well-ventilated area or use a fume hood when pouring resin. Avoid skin contact — photopolymer resins are skin sensitizers and repeated exposure can cause allergic contact dermatitis. If resin contacts skin, wash immediately with soap and water (do not use IPA on skin). Wear a lab coat or apron to protect clothing.]]
[[Has emergency procedures::Skin contact: wash immediately with soap and water. Eye contact: flush with water for 15 minutes and seek medical attention. Resin spill: absorb with paper towels, clean surface with IPA, dispose of contaminated materials as hazardous waste. If symptoms of sensitization develop (rash, respiratory irritation), stop working with resin and consult occupational health.]]
[[Has waste disposal::Uncured liquid resin is hazardous waste — never pour down the drain. Cure residual resin by exposing to sunlight or a UV lamp before disposal. Used IPA wash solution becomes hazardous waste after resin contamination; collect in labeled waste containers. Cured solid resin (fully post-cured) can be disposed of as regular solid waste. Used FEP films, contaminated gloves, and paper towels go in hazardous waste.]]
[[Has technique::SLA 3D printing]]
[[Has technique::MSLA 3D printing]]
[[Has technique::DLP 3D printing]]
<!-- OntologySync End -->
[[Category:SOP]]
[[Category:OntologySync-managed-resource]]

== Required PPE ==
* Nitrile gloves (latex does not provide adequate protection against photopolymer resins)
* Safety glasses or splash goggles
* Lab coat or chemical-resistant apron
* Respiratory protection if ventilation is inadequate (half-face respirator with organic vapor cartridge)

== Resin Handling ==
# Only open resin bottles in a ventilated area.
# Shake or stir resin thoroughly before pouring into the printer vat.
# Pour slowly to avoid splashing. Use a funnel if needed.
# Reseal bottles immediately after use to prevent UV exposure and contamination.
# Store resin in a cool, dark location away from windows and UV sources.
# Check resin expiration dates — expired resin may not cure properly.

== Post-Processing ==

=== Washing ===
# Remove the build platform from the printer carefully, keeping it level to avoid dripping.
# Wash prints in IPA (isopropyl alcohol, 90%+) or the manufacturer-recommended wash solution.
# Use two wash stages for best results: a dirty wash (2-3 minutes) followed by a clean wash (2-3 minutes).
# Do not exceed recommended wash times — over-washing can soften fine details.
# Allow prints to air dry completely before curing.

=== Post-Curing ===
# Place washed and dried prints in a UV curing station.
# Follow the resin manufacturer's recommended cure time and temperature.
# Rotating or flipping parts during curing ensures even exposure.
# Parts are safe to handle without gloves only after full post-cure.

== Printer Maintenance ==
* Inspect the FEP film or release membrane regularly for scratches, cloudiness, or punctures.
* Filter resin in the vat through a paint strainer before long storage periods.
* Clean the build platform with IPA between prints.
* Keep the printer's UV screen or laser optics clean and free of resin contamination.

== Storage and Shelf Life ==
* Unopened resin: follow manufacturer expiration date (typically 1-2 years).
* Opened resin: use within 6 months for best results.
* Resin left in the printer vat: use within 1-2 weeks or filter and return to the bottle.
