<!-- OntologySync Start -->
{{SOP
|has_description=Safety and operating procedures for solder reflow ovens used in PCB assembly
|has_document_type=SOP
|has_sop_type=Safety
|has_purpose=Establishes safe operating, loading, and maintenance practices for solder reflow ovens. Applies to all reflow ovens (convection, infrared, toaster-oven conversions) used for SMD PCB assembly. Covers both leaded and lead-free solder paste profiles.
|has_safety_precautions=Reflow ovens reach temperatures of 250C+ (480F+). Never touch the oven chamber, door, heating elements, or PCBs during or immediately after a reflow cycle. Wear heat-resistant gloves when loading or unloading boards. Wear safety glasses to protect against flux splashes. Flux fumes are released during reflow and can irritate the respiratory system and eyes — operate the oven in a well-ventilated area or with a fume extraction system. Do not leave a reflow oven unattended during operation. Keep the area around the oven clear of flammable materials, solvents, and paper. Only trained personnel should operate the reflow oven.
|has_emergency_procedures=For thermal burns, cool under running water for at least 10 minutes and seek medical attention for serious burns. If flux fumes cause respiratory distress, move to fresh air immediately. In case of fire, use a Class C (electrical) fire extinguisher — never use water on an electrical fire. If the oven behaves abnormally (smoke, burning smell, unusual noises), power it off immediately at the wall outlet or breaker. Keep a first aid kit with burn treatment supplies near the oven workstation.
|has_waste_disposal=Used solder paste containers and expired solder paste are hazardous waste due to lead content (leaded paste) or flux chemistry. Dispose through EHS hazardous waste channels. Cleaning wipes and swabs contaminated with flux or solder paste should be collected in labeled waste containers. Used flux residue scraped from the oven interior is hazardous waste. Empty solder paste jars should be treated as hazardous waste if they contained leaded paste.
|has_technique=Reflow soldering, SMD assembly
}}
<!-- OntologySync End -->
[[Category:SOP]]
[[Category:OntologySync-managed-resource]]

== Required PPE ==
* Heat-resistant gloves (when loading/unloading boards or opening a hot oven)
* Safety glasses
* ESD wrist strap and grounded ESD mat (when handling PCBs)
* Respiratory protection or fume extraction if ventilation is inadequate

== Reflow Temperature Profile Overview ==
A reflow profile has four phases. Understanding these is essential for setting up profiles and diagnosing soldering defects.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Phase !! Temperature Range !! Duration !! Purpose
|-
| Preheat || Room temp to 150C || 60-90 sec || Gradually heat the board and components to avoid thermal shock
|-
| Soak (Thermal Equalization) || 150C - 200C || 60-120 sec || Activate flux, equalize temperature across the board
|-
| Reflow || Peak 235-245C (lead-free) or 210-225C (leaded) || 20-40 sec above liquidus || Melt solder paste and form joints
|-
| Cooling || Peak down to below 100C || Controlled descent || Solidify joints; avoid cooling faster than 3-4C/sec to prevent thermal stress
|}

'''Note:''' Always consult the solder paste manufacturer's datasheet for the recommended profile. Lead-free pastes (SAC305, SAC387) require higher peak temperatures than leaded (Sn63/Pb37) pastes.

== Procedure ==

=== Before Reflow ===
# Verify the PCB has been properly stenciled with solder paste and all SMD components have been placed.
# Inspect component placement under magnification if needed — misaligned components should be corrected before reflow.
# Select the correct temperature profile for your solder paste type (leaded vs lead-free) and board characteristics (mass, layer count, thermal relief).
# Ensure the oven is clean and free of flux residue from previous runs.
# Turn on fume extraction or verify ventilation is adequate.

=== Loading ===
# Wear heat-resistant gloves if the oven has residual heat from a previous run.
# Place the PCB in the center of the oven on the rack or tray. Ensure the board sits level.
# For double-sided boards with components on both sides, use a support fixture or carrier tray to prevent bottom-side components from falling.
# Close the oven door.

=== Running the Reflow Profile ===
# Start the reflow profile on the oven controller.
# Monitor the temperature readout throughout the cycle. Watch for the profile tracking the expected curve.
# Do not open the oven door during the reflow cycle — this causes temperature drops that can result in cold joints.
# After the reflow peak, the cooling phase begins. Some ovens open the door automatically; for others, open the door when the controller indicates cooling is complete.

=== Unloading ===
# Wait until the board has cooled below 50C before handling without gloves.
# Remove the PCB carefully — the board and oven interior may still be hot.
# Inspect solder joints visually or under magnification. Look for bridging, tombstoning, cold joints, or insufficient wetting.

== Common Soldering Defects ==
* '''Bridging:''' Excess solder paste or component misalignment. Review stencil application and placement.
* '''Tombstoning:''' One end of a passive component lifts off the pad. Usually caused by uneven heating or pad design. Check profile soak phase.
* '''Cold joints (dull, grainy):''' Insufficient peak temperature or time above liquidus. Adjust the reflow phase.
* '''Solder balls:''' Excess paste, or paste deposited outside pad areas. Review stencil alignment and aperture design.

== Maintenance ==

=== After Each Session ===
* Allow the oven to cool completely before cleaning.
* Wipe flux residue from the oven interior, racks, and door seal with IPA and lint-free wipes.
* Inspect the thermocouple for flux contamination — clean with IPA if needed.

=== Monthly ===
* Inspect heating elements for damage or discoloration.
* Verify thermocouple accuracy with a known reference thermometer.
* Clean or replace fume extraction filters.
* Check door seals and hinges for wear.

=== As Needed ===
* Run a test profile with a thermocouple attached to a bare board to verify the oven is tracking the programmed profile accurately.
* Recalibrate the controller if temperature readings have drifted.
